# NZXT CPU cooler 1e71:170e reverse-engineered USB 2.0 protocol

(Unless otherwise specified, all byte and bit offsets are 0-based, and all values are sent and received in big-endian byte order.)

The device has 1 configuration, 1 interface, and 1 alternative setting.  The interface has besides the default CONTROL IN/OUT endpoint `0x00` an INTERRUPT OUT endpoint `0x01` and an INTERRUPT IN endpoint `0x81`.

The protocol allows

- monitoring of
  - the fan speed
  - the pump speed
  - the liquid temperature
- setting
  - the fan speed
  - the pump speed
  - the NZXT logo LED
  - the 8 LEDs in the ring

# Initialization

The device is initialized via a CONTROL message with the following constant setup request data:

Bytes | Field | Meaning 
------|-------|--------
`0x80` | request type | device in
`0x06` | request | GET DESCRIPTOR standard request
`0x0303` | value | descriptor type and descriptor index
`0x0409` | index | language id `en-US`
`0x0082` | length | descriptor length 130

The device then responds with its serial number as the descriptor:

Byte | Meaning
-----|--------
0 | total data length *L*
1 | `0x03` constant (type of data is string)
2 – (*L*−1) | ((*L* − 2) / 2)-digit serial number, encoded as little-endian UTF-16 string

For example, the following is sent if the serial number is `0123456789A`:

    0x18 0x03 0x30 0x00 0x31 0x00 0x32 0x00 0x33 0x00 0x34 0x00 0x35 0x00 0x36 0x00 0x37 0x00 0x38 0x00 0x39 0x00 0x41 0x00

# Monitoring

A status update is requested via an INTERRUPT request of at least 17 bytes on endpoint `0x81`.  The device then responds with the following data:

Byte | Meaning
-----|--------
0 | `0x04` header (constant)
1 | liquid temperature [°C]
2 | unknown 1 (not constant, fluctuates between 1 and 9)
3 – 4 | fan speed [rpm]
5 – 6 | pump speed [rpm]
7 – 16 | `0x00 0x00 0x00 0x78 0x02 0x00 0x01 0x08 0x1e 0x00` footer (appears to be constant)

For example, the following is sent if the liquid temperature is 44 °C, the fan speed is 635 rpm, and the pump speed is 2000 rpm:

    0x04 0x2c 0x02 0x02 0x7b 0x07 0xd0 0x00 0x00 0x00 0x78 0x02 0x00 0x01 0x08 0x1e 0x00

# Setting

A set directive is sent via an INTERRUPT message on endpoint `0x01`.  Byte 0 is always `0x02`.  Byte 1 decides what to set:

Byte 1 | Sets
-------|-----
`0x4d` | fan/pump speed
`0x4c` | LEDs

The meaning of the rest of the bytes depends on byte 1.

## Fan/pump speed

Byte | Meaning
-----|--------
2 – 3 | set speed of what
4 | speed [% of max speed]

Bytes 2 – 3 have the following valid values:

Bytes 2 – 3 | Sets | Valid speed
------------|------|------------
`0x00 0x00` | fan | 35% – 100%
`0x40 0x00` | pump | 50% – 100%

For example, the following sets the pump to 75%:

    0x02 0x4d 0x40 0x00 0x4b

and the following sets the fan to 100%:

    0x02 0x4d 0x00 0x00 0x64

## LEDs

Byte | Meaning
-----|--------
2 | LED & moving & direction byte
3 | preset
4 | interval & group size & cycle byte
5 – 7 | nzxt logo LED color (GRB (**NB**))
8 – 10 | ring LED 0 color (RGB)
11 – 13 | ring LED 1 color (RGB)
14 – 16 | ring LED 2 color (RGB)
17 – 19 | ring LED 3 color (RGB)
20 – 22 | ring LED 4 color (RGB)
23 – 25 | ring LED 5 color (RGB)
26 – 28 | ring LED 6 color (RGB)
29 – 31 | ring LED 7 color (RGB)

Colors are in general represented as 3-byte sequences, red-green-blue for the ring LEDs, and green-red-blue (**NB**!) for the NZXT logo LED.

For presets that cycle, a separate INTERRUPT message is sent for each cycle.  It is possible to set up to 8 distinct cycles.

### Byte 2

Has the following structure (least significant bit first):

Bit | Meaning
----|--------
0 – 2 | which LEDs to set
3 | moving (only meaningful for some presets)
4 – 7 | direction (only meaningful for some presets)

#### Which LEDs to set

Value | Meaning
------|--------
`0b000` | synchronized: both logo and ring LEDs
`0b001` | logo LED
`0b010` | ring LEDs

#### Moving

Only meaningful for preset "alternating".  It decides wether to rotate the colors around the ring (value `1`) or just switch back-and-forth between them (value `0`).

#### Direction

Sets the direction of movement of the light.  It can be:

Value | Meaning
------|--------
`0b0000` | "forward" (clockwise)
`0b0001` | "backward" (counter-clockwise)

### Byte 3

Value | Preset
------|-------
`0x00` | "fixed"
`0x01` | "fading"
`0x02` | "spectrum wave"
`0x03` | "marquee"
`0x04` | "covering marquee"
`0x05` | "alternating"
`0x06` | "breathing"
`0x07` | "pulse"
`0x08` | "tai chi"
`0x09` | "water cooler"
`0x0a` | "load"

### Byte 4

Has the following structure (least significant bit first):

Bit | Meaning
----|--------
0 – 2 | interval (only meaningful for some presets)
3 – 4 | group size (only meaningful for some presets)
5 – 7 | cycle number

#### Interval

Determines how long the cycle determined by cycle number is:

Value | Meaning
------|--------
`0b000` | slowest
`0b001` | slower
`0b010` | normal
`0b011` | faster
`0b100` | fastest

#### Group size

Only meaningful for preset "marquee".  It decides how many LEDs of the ring are on at the same time, i.e. how long of an arc the light covers.  Group size *n* says that *n* + 3 consecutive LEDs (**NB**: not *n*) shall be on at the same time, where 0 ≤ *n* ≤ 3.

#### Cycle number

Used for dynamic presets.  Up to 8 cycles are permitted.  Cycle number *n* says that the colors are to be set for cycle *n*, where 0 ≤ *n* ≤ 7.

### Colors

The rest of the bytes contains the color(s) to set.  When the NZXT logo's color is to be set, it is in byte 5 – 7 as a GRB 3-tuple.  When the ring LEDs are to be set, the colors are in bytes 8 – 31 as a sequence of 8 RGB 3-tuples.  The colors not to be set by the message are ignored.

Ring LEDs 0 – 7 are physically laid out in the following fashion in the device:

      7 0
    6     1
    5     2
      4 3

### Compatiblities

The ring LEDs by themselves may be set to any of the presets.  For setting the logo LEDs and synchronized LEDs only specific presets are allowed.

The following table documents which presets are allowed for which LEDs, how many cycles are allowed for each preset, and which fields are meaningful for which presets (the fields not in the table are meaningful for *all* presets).  Fields that are not meaningful for a given preset should be zeroed out (or in the case of Interval should be set to `2` ("normal")).

Preset | Logo / synchronized LEDs | Cycles | Moving | Direction | Interval | Group Size
-------|--------------------------|--------|--------|-----------|----------|-----------
fixed | yes | 1 | no | no | no | no
fading | yes | 1 – 8 | no | no | yes | no
spectrum wave | yes | 1 | no | yes | yes | no
marquee | no | 1 | no | yes | yes | yes
covering marquee | yes | 1 – 8 | no | yes | yes | no
alternating | no | 2 | yes | no | yes | no
breathing | yes | 1 – 8 | no | no | yes | no
pulse | yes | 1 – 8 | no | no | yes | no
tai chi | no | 2 | no | no | yes | no
water cooler | no | 1 | no | no | yes | no
load | no | 1 | no | no | no | no
